---
layout: post
title:  "On Plato's Crito"
date:   2017-02-17 01:01:01 -0400
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
categories: philosophy
comments: true
---
In Plato's Crito, Socrates argues against answering injustice with an injustice; in his case, injustice towards the state.  However, in his argument, there is a necessary precondition stating there must exist an implicit, fair contract between the individual and the state. Socrates suggests that he accepted this agreement by choosing to live in Athens when he could have otherwise, therefore benefiting from the state. Given that he has accepted the contract to abide be the laws of the state, Socrates argues that it would be an injustice for him to try to evade his punishment, despite it being unjust.

His argument seems valid, in the strict sense of the word; however, I contend that his necessary precondition, a fair contract between the state and individual, applies only to a privileged few. Furthermore, when this condition is not met, I claim that injustice can be met with injustice. <!--more--> (There is an extreme loss of nuance in my last statement so it is important to keep in mind that my argument is more against Socrates’ argument than it is for responding to injustice).

# Necessary preconditions
I believe that in order to have a fair and just contract between the state there must be certain preconditions that must be met: 
The individual must be a free and able to choose between different nation-states.
The individual must be sufficiently benefiting from the state.
In the case of Socrates, these conditions are met (shown without proof). However, I argue that for the majority of people these preconditions may not be met. 

> The individual must be a free and able to choose between different nation-states.

For a fair contract to exist, there must exist an opportunity for choice. If an individual has no choice in the contract with the state, then it is unfair and unjust. If we consider the majority of the population today, many do not have such a choice in their contract with the state. Whether due to poverty, government, or ignorance, many are bounded to their nation-state of birth. There is almost no concept of agency --except for those privileged to be born in some wealthy civilizations. Consequently, when people do not have the choice in their government, they can be bounded by arbitrary laws that treat its people unfairly. In response, citizens may protest with actions that are deemed unjust by its governors, yet are necessary for equality.

> The individual must be sufficiently benefiting from the state.

In his dialogue with Crito, Socrates explains that he would feel great shame if he decided to flee Athens. He felt that the state was working in the citizens’ best interest and for him to disobey its law would make him guilty of taking advantage of the state. Again, however, this is not the case for many across the globe. Daily, people are met with corrupt governments working not with its people’s interest in mind. In these such cases, people do not feel shame for going against the state; for there is nothing for them to take advantage of. And again, there will be cases where its citizens respond with necessary actions, that, to the state, seem unjust.

# Round Up
The context for which injustices are committed is paramount. Socrates had the privilege with living under a mutual contract with the state and consequently was against answering injustice with injustice. However, there are cases when this contract is not mutual and it is in the best interest of citizens to act unjustly in the eyes of the state.
