---
layout: post
title:  "Free Will and the Principle of Alternative Possibilities"
date:   2017-03-03 01:01:01 -0400
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
category: philosophy
tags: [philosophy, free will, essays]
comments: true
---
> Note: This essay is a response to Frankfurt's essay on the Principle of Alternative
> Possibilities which can be found [here](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/~uctytho/dfwCompatFrankfurt.htm)

In the discussion of free will and morality, one controversial issue has been the principle of alternate possibilities. This principle states that “a person is morally responsible for what he has done only if he could have done otherwise” (Frankfurt, 714).  On one hand, many philosophers view this principle as an inherent truth. On the other hand, there are others, like Harry G. Frankfurt which contend that having no other possibilities does not automatically exempt a person from moral responsibility. In this essay, I will examine and evaluate Frankfurt's argument against the validity of the Principle of Alternate Responsibilities. <!--more--> For this, I will consider the thought experiment put forth by Frankfurt in his essay “Alternate Possibilities and Moral Responsibility”. I will begin by summarizing his thought experiment in which he suggests shows that a person can have no other choices yet still be morally responsible their actions. After, I will evaluate his claim and ultimately show that its validity depends heavily on the assumption that is a matter of debate and not easily determined. The assumption I am referencing is the idea of compatibilism, which exerts that determinism and free will are compatible  — terms which will be explained in more detail during my evaluation. Consequently, I will show that Frankfurt's argument against the validity of the Principle of Alternative Possibilities is sound only when you assume compatibilism is true, and false otherwise.


In his essay “Alternate Possibilities and Moral Responsibility”, Harry G. Frankfurt argues, by counterexample, that the inherent truth of the Principle of Alternative Possibilities is false. Again, this principle maintains “that a person bears no moral responsibility for having performed some action if there were circumstances that made it impossible for him to avoid performing it. ” (Frankfurt, 422) Frankfurt challenges this claim by way of counterexample, suggesting that there can exist a person such that they have no alternative options, and yet can still be held morally responsible. This is because they can still do some action from their own wants despite having a lack of choice. Therefore, Frankfurt suggests that moral responsibility depends on the motive of the individual, not lack of options. However,  before being able to evaluate his claim, I will have to elaborate on the details of his thought experiment, for which I will later show are of great importance. Having said that, let’s consider the counterexample put forth by Frankfurt.
Frankfurt sets up his thought experiment by introducing two subjects, a person who is deciding between two options, named Jones, and another individual which has the ability to control Jones, named Black. In this experiment, Black’s goal is to have Jones perform a certain action, ‘A’. However, he will only force Jones to do ‘A’ if Jones decides to do another option, ‘B’. More clearly,  if Jones decides to do ‘A’ because of his own desires, Black will not interfere. And conversely, if Jones decides to do ‘B’, Black will interfere with Jones such that Jones performs ‘A’. Therefore, according to Frankfort, Jones has no alternative possibilities because whatever he decides he will still end up doing ‘A’. Nevertheless, Jones can still be held morally responsible depending on his reason for doing ‘A’. Specifically, if Jones decides to do ‘A’ and Black never interferes, then it was like Black never existed. He explains that this case is comparable to any other situation where somebody does have alternative choices — for which we would hold them morally accountable for their actions. Therefore, Frankfurt believes that this example provides evidence for “the fact that [a person] could not have done otherwise clearly provides no basis for supporting that he might have done otherwise”. (Frankfurt, 422) However, the soundness of this argument begins to dismantle once we consider what it means for Jones to decide something out of his own wants.


Although, before I address this point, I need to take a slight digression to define terms that I will be using in my argument. First, I will define determinism. Determinism is the belief that all events, including human action, are ultimately determined by causes external to the will.  Second, free will is defined as the ability to act at one’s own discretion, that is, being the source of one's own actions. Some philosophers believe that determinism and free will are logically inconsistent; this line of thought it called incompatibilism. Conversely, the belief that free will and determinism are consistent is called compatibilism. Now that I have defined these concepts, we can now consider the soundness of Frankfurt’s argument.


Specifically, Frankfurt’s argument against the Principle of Alternative Possibilities is problematic because it does not clearly address the key assumption as to whether a person is the author of his own wants and desires, that is, has free will. We can see how fundamental this assumption is to Frankfurt’s argument by comparing the implications of moral responsibility in cases when Jones does or doesn’t have free will. For example, if we take a compatibilist view — assuming that Jones has free will and yet still has a determined outcome — we conclude, for the exact reasoning put forth by Frankfurt, that Jones can be held morally responsible. However, we cannot come to this conclusion when we take an incompatibilist view. We can see this more clearly when we consider the role Black plays in this thought experiment. Frankfurt uses Black to ensure a deterministic future by having power to “manipulate the minute process of Jones' brain and nervous system .. so that causal focus running in and out of his synapses and along the poor man’s nerves determine that he choose to act and that he does act in one way and not the other”. (Frankfurt 421) By focusing on determinism only after Jones has made a decision, Frankfurt overlooks the deeper problem which is how Jones came to make up his mind in the first place. Frankfurt himself suggests that the minute process and physics of the brain are reason enough to make Jones decide his actions, yet does not make any claims whether the minute process prior to Black’s interface were really in Jones' control to begin with. Furthermore, if we assume an incompatibilist point of view, we can say that Jones really did have no choice in controlling these minute process, and therefore his actions. Consequently, this implies this thought experiment is not truly a counterexample to the Principle of Alternate Possibilities. From Frankfurt’s conclusion, we can infer that he indeed assumes that Jones does have free will. However, Frankfurt does not make a sufficient argument to believe why this is true. Frankfurt even acknowledges this shortcoming by saying he “does not propose to consider in what sense the concept of ‘could have done otherwise’ figures in the Principle of Alternate Possibilities” (Frankfurt 420). However, since we just showed that depending on your view of compatibilism, Frankfurt’s thought experiment is not sufficient because one can argue Jones' never did have any choice in the first place. Therefore, Frankfurt’s argument is unsound because he fails to address the validity of his compatibilist assumption.

In summary, Frankfurt’s argument against the Principle of Alternative Possibilities is valid but not sound because he does not provide good reasoning to believe his compatibilist assumption.

Citations: Perry, John, Michael Bratman, and John Martin Fischer. Introduction to Philosophy: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford UP USA, 2016. Print.
