---
layout: post
title:  "2019 Q2 OKRs"
date:   2017-04-03 20:06:01 -0400
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
categories: okrs
tags: [okr, bjj, carnivore, health]
comments: true
---

This quarter I am conducting an experiment wherein I live my life by Objective & Key Results (OKRs). Ultimately this is an experiment of focus and discipline: "What can I achieve if I put 100% of my energy into succeeding in achieviNng explicitly defined goals?

<!--more-->

Below is an outline of my goals and rationales behind them. These are to be completed by June 30th.

# Mission: Become the best version of myself — to push myself beyond what I though I was previously capable of
*I am immensely proud of what I have accomplished so far in my life. Despite that, I always asked myself, "what if I just pushed a little harder". Of course we can't work hard in all waking moments of our lives, but I do think I can put more of a conscious effort into pushing my limits.* 
*Almost by definition, we don't know what we are capable of until we do it. So it is important to keep pushing our boundaries to see what we will become next. This process of discovery and growth is profoundly pleasurable and I will continue to chase it as long as I can.* 
## Objective: Spend time on what matters, eliminate or optimize parts of my life that take time away from the things I love
*After moving to a new area and starting working full time, I have begun to feel the pains of daily life and maintenance. In college and in prior lives, most things were taken care of. I could focus on school and duties. Now, it's a bit different. I have complete control over my life — a gift if used effectively, and a curse otherwise. So far, I have let this transition get the best of me. This goal is a call of action to take control in my life.* 
### Key Result 1: Reduce meal related time to three hours a week
*This may sound like a joke, but I cook two steaks everyday. As someone who does not find cooking immensely pleasurable, cooking feels like a huge time sink. Reducing the time buying produce, prepping and cooking will immediately free time up for things I want to accomplish.*  
### Key Result 2: Identify and solve 25 inefficiencies in my life
*In a similar vein as KR1, but more general. I want to find solutions to reoccurring problems in my daily life.* 
### Key Result 3: Spend 20 eventful moments with people I care deeply about and write about the time I spent with them.
*What's the point of optimizing your life if you have nobody to spend it with? I foresee that achieving many of these goals will take time away from spending it with people I care about. This is a balancing KR so that I remember what really matters.* 

## Objective: Be in the best shape of my entire life
*I am fairly healthy despite the lack of discipline and structure I have put towards my health routine. Regardless, health is the most important thing in life, and I think it is worth being deliberate. The following KRs are mostly self explanatory. The theory in choosing these particular KRs was that they best measure overall health and athleticism over aesthetics or pure strength.* 
### Key Result 1:  Reduce 300m sprint time by 20%
### Key Result 2: Increase maximum pullups in 3 minutes 30%
### Key Result 3: Increase vertical jump 20%
### Key Result 4: Increase med ball chest pass distance 50%

## Objective: Practice my creative expression by building out my own personal space on the internet (loucru1.github.io)
*Sitting at the top of Maslow's hierarchy of needs is Self-actualization. By luck and hard work, I have cllimbed most of the pyramid and it is now the time for me to start focusing on brining my desires and will into real life. Building out my website is a good first step. It will give me a a proper home on this internet that I love so dearly.* 
### Key Result 1: Rewrite website using preferred technologies (Clojure, AWS, emacs org-mode integrations)
*I am a software engineer — tech and programming are my medium. However, by nature of working for other people, you don't always get to make all the decisions yourself. This is a chance to choose my own path and use the technologies that bring me joy.*

## Objective: Feel competent and pride in my skill level in Brazilian Jiu Jitsu
*My entire life I have played sports. By far, Brazilian Jiu Jitsu has been one of the most interesting sports I have done. Unlike most sports, it has a long timeline (many people practice jiu jitsu for 10+ years) and fervent learning community behind it (masters, explicit skill levels, etc). In my beginning months of starting this skill I have really started to love the sport and made great friends. I want to take the next step delve deeper into the world of Brazilian Jiu Jitsu.* 
### Key Result 1: Pass guard 50 times
*Guard passing has consistently been one of the biggest blockers in my bjj growth. More often then not, when I get stuck in someone's guard, I will be stuck there until the roll ends or my opponent progresses to another position. Developing good guard passing will allow me to stop getting in bad positions and help me get into deeper sequences.*
### Key Result 2: Reduce rate of adversarial submission to 10%
*Starting bjj is about survival. If you can't survive, you won't ever be able to work up to submit somebody. This seems necessary for any serious attempt at an offense.* 
### Key Result 3: Obtain 10 submissions
*In a few months this may seem like a low number, but currently most matches with fellow white belts consist of positional reversals and no submissions. The few submissions I have landed were because of obvious mistakes from beginner white belts. So right now this feels like a good goal that can be adjusted in the future.*
